---

layout: post
title: "[Two pointer] Exercising reducing time performance"
date: 2025-04-25 17:00 +0900
last_modified_at: 2025-04-25 17:00:00 +0900
tags: [algorithm, two pointer, binary search]
math: true
---
I solved [167 Leetcode problem](https://leetcode.com/problems/two-sum-ii-input-array-is-sorted/description/).



This is not hard. I think it is very good problem for practicing **Time complexity** reduction for interviews. 



>  Given a **1-indexed** array of integers `numbers` that is already sorted in ***non-decreasing order***, find two numbers such that they add up to a specific `target` number. Let these two numbers be `numbers[index1]` and `numbers[index2]` where `1 <= index1 < index2 <= numbers.length`. 
>
> Return *the indices of the two numbers,* `index1` *and* `index2`*, **added by one** as an integer array* `[index1, index2]` *of length 2.* 
>
> The tests are generated such that there is **exactly one solution**. You **may not** use the same element twice. 
>
> - Your solution must use only constant extra space.


Since the size of `numbers` is not large(ranging from **2 to 30,000**), so a **Brute-force** algorithm is also possible. 

I didn't try this way but I think it would still meet the time constraints.

{: .message} 

***Idea:*** iterating from first to last index of list, and iterating to find the another value which is target - first value chosen from outer iteration in each iteration. 

this brute-force **algorithm takes**  
$$
O(n^2)
$$

---



From next, I implemented **Binary search** way.

{: .message}

***Idea:*** iterate from index  0 to the last index of list. For each iteration, I search for value which is (`target - number[i]` ) (i is from iteration) using Binary search

this binary search **algorithm takes** 
$$
O(n) \times O(\log n) = O(n \log n)
$$
.

This method was relatively slow when submitted on Leetcode, so I rethought that how to reduce the time complexity further.

---

Then I tried the **two-pointer** approach.

{: .message}

***Idea***: I declared two pointers: one pointing to the 0 index value, and the other pointing to the last. I looped through the list, checking sum of values two pointers point to. 

- If sum is greater than the target, I moved the rear pointer one step backward. 

- If sum is less than the target, I moved front pointer one step forward. 

- If the sum is equals the target, I returned the result as [front position + 1, rear position +1].

This is my code base.        

```python
from typing import List

class Solution:
    def twoSum(self, numbers: List[int], target: int) -> List[int]:
        eidx: int = len(numbers) - 1
        res: List[int] = []
        for i in range(0, len(numbers)):
            sv: int = numbers[i]
            ev: int = numbers[eidx]
            sub_sum = sv+ev
            while (i < eidx) and (sub_sum >= target):    
                if sub_sum == target:
                    res = [i+1, eidx + 1]
                    break

                eidx = eidx - 1
                sub_sum = numbers[i] + numbers[eidx]
            
            if len(res) != 0:
                break
        
        return res
```



{: .important }

The point is how to setting finish condition of `while`-statement to move `rear pointer`

1. front index > rear index: already `checked`.
2. sum is less then `target`: `rear pointer` no longer need to move step backward(more less), so `front pointer` should move step forward.





This algorithm takes 
$$
O(n)
$$
.

I got into the top 1% in terms of time performance among all submitted solutions.



When I solve this problem, I enjoyed the process of gradually decreasing the **time complexity**.