---

layout: post
title: "[Union find] Is it okay?"
date: 2025-05-31 13:00 +0900
last_modified_at: 2025-05-31 13:00 +0900
tags: [algorithm, union-find]
math: true
---

I solved [128 Leetcode problem](https://leetcode.com/problems/longest-consecutive-sequence/description/).


I have studied **union-find** as ***uf***. Before I mention problem, ***uf*** is very funny algorithm. It treats **relation** and **disjoint set** which is two sets have not relations, but only it wants to know `start` and `last`. ***uf*** pursues result like developer.

We can use **array**, **map** to easily implement **disjoint set** and ***uf***.

***uf*** has 3 main apis
 1. find
    - find root of input element
 2. union
    - merge two group of dis joint set
 3. connected
    - connectivity between two group of input elements.

each api's time complexity gets $$O(\alpha(n) \approx O(1))$$. in this context, $$\alpha(n)$$ is **inverse Ackermann function** which is grows vey steadily. 

let's back to promblem.

Description is easy. find ***longest consecutive sequence***.
let's assume there is input *list* with *[100,2,200,3,4,1]*. in this case, the ***longest consecutive sequcence*** is *1,2,3,4*, so answer is *4*.

this is my algorithm to use ***uf*** and ***map***. I use ***map*** data structure to implement **disjoint set** with *rank* and **union find**. 

{: .message}
start iteration from 0 index of list to last index, in each iteration, check value -1 and +1 to connect value and adjacent value. if they are conntected pass else union two disjoint set group. because of *rank*, union will join from small rank to big rank.
lastly do iteration of rank in dis joint set, I get biggest one.

```python
class Solution:
    def longestConsecutive(self, nums: List[int]) -> int:
        uf = uff(nums)

        for key in nums:
            key_m = key - 1
            key_p = key + 1
            if uf.find(key_m) != None:
                if uf.connected(key, key_m) == False:
                    uf.union(key, key_m)
                
            if uf.find(key_p) != None:
                if uf.connected(key, key_p) == False:
                    uf.union(key, key_p)
        
        subMax: int = 0
        for k, v in uf.rank.items():
            subMax = max(subMax, v)
        
        return subMax
```

let's start to get time complexity of my algorithm.
1. iteration $$O(n)$$
2. ***uf*** is $$O(\alpha(n) \approx O(1))$$ in each iteration
result is $$O(n) \times O(1) = O(n)$$

even though I got $$O(n)$$, my algorithm is the bottom 99% algorithm(very slow, almost 1 second). so I saw other, they also did implement by $$O(n)$$, but don't use ***uf***.

{: .message}
first, we convert the list into a set to allow $$O(1)$$, so takes $$O(n)$$.
second, for each iteration, check this value is possible to be smallest value in sequence by checking existance of **value - 1**, if **value - 1** exists in list, if it doesn't, entering inner loop to count how long then consecutive sequence continues by checking $$value + 1$$, $$value + 2$$ in the set, and track longest sequence value.

```python
for v in nums:
    s.add(v) # s is set data structure.
sub_max = 0

for v in s:
    if v-1 not in s:
        length_longest = 1
        
        while v + leng_longest in s:
            
            length_longest += 1
        sub_max = max(sub_max, v + leng_longest)

return sub_max

```

this code also got $$O(n)$$, but there is no boilerplate and optimized, this kind of algorithm's real running time is under $$100ms$$.

<h3>My algorithm is not okay...</h3>