---
layout: post
title: "[Network] HostSNI"
tags: [Network, TCP, TLS, HostSNI]
last_modified_at: 2026-07-03T21:48:00
---

I am currently running k3d on my old MacBook Pro to test a K3s cluster. When I initially set up k3d, I made a mistake: I didn't look ahead(I didn't anticipate future needs) and only forwarded ports 80 and 443 from the host machine to the virtual machine.

After configuring the cluster, I needed to forward additional ports. However, I soon realized that adding new ports typically requires rebuilding the cluster from scratch. (Since k3d runs inside Docker containers on top of a VM like Colima, the VM isn't flexible enough to open new ports on the fly.)

At first, I used `kubectl port-forward` as a temporary workaround. While it worked, it was unstable and frequently dropped connections.

Finally, I discovered Host-SNI (Server Name Indication). Simply put, this technique wraps TCP packets using TLS. Normally, when connecting an application to a database like PostgreSQL, we use an IP and a port, which operates at Layer 4 (L4). However, since I hadn't opened any new ports on my VM, I had to leverage the existing 80 and 443 ports.

This is where Host-SNI comes in handy. Because TLS encryption involves a certificate that specifies a "domain," the client and server perform a handshake over port 443 using that domain name. This allows the IngressRoute in k3d to inspect the domain and route the traffic accordingly.

Previously, I conceptualized domain-based routing strictly as a Layer 7 (L7/Application Layer) technique. However, looking at it more sophisticatedly through the OSI model, TLS actually operates at Layer 6 (L6/Presentation Layer).

Since I already owned a domain and a wildcard certificate issued by Cloudflare (obtained internally using the dns01 challenge), I was able to implement this.

Here is an example of the `IngressRouteTCP` configuration I used:

```yaml
kind: IngressRouteTCP
metadata:
  name: service-routing-rules
  namespace: proxy
spec:
  entryPoints:
    - websecure
  routes:
    - match: HostSNI(`db.example.com`)
      services:
        - name: db-service
          namespace: target-ns
          port: 5432
  tls:
    secretName: wildcard-tls
```

By implementing this solution, I successfully routed my database traffic without having to rebuild my test cluster from scratch.

Gemini's Refined Version

----
The Article original version I wrote

I am running k3d on my old Mac book pro, which is developed for testing K3s cluster. I did a mistake, when first setting up k3d, user should set which ports are used as port forwarding(from host machine to virtual machine), at that time I did not see widely, so I just set only 2 ports which are 80 and 443.

after setting up cluster, I have had some needs to do port forward other port, later I knew that I have to setup from the scratch, if I want to forward new ports.(Maybe k3d consists of Docker container, it needs to run on vm(I have used 'colima'), vm is not flexible to open new ports, just I guess)

first I used temporarily `kubectl port-forward` feature, it worked but it is not permanent and it was not stable(sometime connection was closed)

finally I found "Host-SNI", which is easily speaking that wrapping TCP packet by using TLS. for example when we connect app with Postgresql, we use ip and port, this (ip,port) is recognized on L4 layer. but now I could not use this way why? I did not open new port, so I could use 80,443. 

At this points, we can use Host-SNI. TLS requires certificate which also includes "domain", so when packet moves with TLS, first client and server need to do handshakes, for this process packet goes into 443 port with "domain", so IngressRoute in K3d check this domain and then could route.

I had curiosity about Host-SNI, which is not classified as L7 technique(reason why I wrote OSI model is that last time I thought that domain based routing is L7 technique. sophistcately tls is classified as L6)

I already have domain and certificate which is issued by Cloudfare, and I got certificate for internal from Cloudflare(using dns01)

this is examples of ingressRoute yaml used in k3d


As a result, I added this feature, then I don't setup my test cluster from the scratch.